[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well hello everybody Welcome
again to church history and theology
today's episode we get to deal with one
of my favorite topics before we even get
started into the history of the early
church and that is Christ
the head of church
history usually in a church history
class you won't spend much time talking
about the nature of Christ being the
head of church history or anything
related to that you'll usually start
into the story of church history and
those things that have continued on the
things that have happened uh you'll talk
about the earliest church or the book of
Acts or something like this but I think
in a class that is not exclusively on
church history but also involves the
Theology of it we need to take take a
time and set out uh an
expectation and that is the reality that
Christ is the head The Fountain Head
from which not only the church comes but
all of church history comes and so when
we study the history of the church there
is no way I think in a theologically
minded person that you can skip over
this very important aspect of church
history when I say Christ is the head of
church history I don't even mean as I've
already defined church history that it
starts with him uh I mean it is all
about
him as we have discussed before on what
is church history the whole concept of
all of the redeemed from all of the ages
and all of the lands throughout the
world no matter time and space all make
up the church all are a part of the
church's
history when we talk about Christ we are
speaking of himself as the Cornerstone
from which the entire church is built up
into a spiritual house as First Peter
chapter 2 calls it in which sacrifices
that are acceptable are made that whole
concept is dependent on the singular
leadership and headship of the Christ
Jesus himself being the Cornerstone
means several aspects for the church it
means and has massive ramifications for
our understanding of the visible ible
church as well as the invisible church
and how to delineate when we speak of
both when we talk about Christ as the
head of the church's
history we have to speak about as we
have already discussed whenever we talk
about church history we have to talk
about the distinction between the
invisible church and the visible Church
obviously the invisible Church being
that which we cannot see we can perceive
aspects and bits of it but just like the
spirit of God we can see the effects of
the invisible church but we cannot
actually see it we can't hold it we
can't analyze it we can't study it the
invisible church is that which is made
up of all of the redeemed throughout all
of time and space we cannot possibly
study just that we can study the concept
theologically but you cannot hold it in
your hand you cannot know for certain
who you're talking about has actual
salvation or is living in in concert
with what salvation might look like in
their life um those types of things
people can be self- deceived they
certainly are capable of deceiving
others with regards to their own
salvation uh that cannot be fully
perceived the invisible church but it is
an entity that the scriptures speak of
quite
boldly so is the visible
Church the visible church is made up of
what we can see as far as organ
organizations are concerned what we can
measure those who claim to be Christians
those who come together and have the
leadership of um uh that is instilled
there in various formats and into
various forms that carry out the worship
of the one true God uh through Christ
Jesus the visible church I think is
healthfully understood to always be on
some level a mixture of both Christians
and
reprobates you do not have necessarily
any one visible church that is perfectly
matched to the invisible Church in its
area there's always going to be
unbelievers there are always going to be
those who uh through deceitfulness of
riches wander away from the faith and
prove themselves not to be of the good
soil from Jesus's Parable in Matthew 13
but instead show themselves to be of a
different sort of soil one with thorns
and thistles or ones with rocky soil or
ones that are simply there for a time
and then quickly leave um those types of
understandings are things that we cannot
fully grasp in our perspective we do not
have the purview of people's Souls all
we can do is take their profession and
then carry on with the visible
church and this makes the study of
church history complicated because all
we can study is the visible Church by
the very fact that you can only see that
one and so when we are studying the
visible Church how do we address which
ones are proper those there's those who
are consistent there's those who are
inconsistent there's those who are right
those who are wrong um how do we
actually delineate that out as we start
from scripture and move forward well I
hope to be able to answer that for you
today uh at least as far as for how I'm
going to study it you're welcome to
study it a different way start a new
class on your own and uh and pre I I
would love to hear somebody else's
presentation on this but as far as how I
see it and how we're going to move
forward in this class here is how it
goes the invisible church is made up of
all Christians all faithful all Old
Testament Saints from the very beginning
of creation after the fall all the way
down to the end of the age that is all
the redeemed throughout all time in
history um I I would count this as
similar to the nation of Israel there
were those who were true Israel and
there was the nation of Israel one was
invisible one was visible if you
remember the story story of Elijah when
he was very frustrated because everybody
else it seemed from his purview had
bowed the knee to Baal and he was
despondent about this in the wilderness
and God comes up to him he's no I I have
kept
7,000 that have not bowed the knee to
Baal for myself right that it was the
only time in the ancient um in the
ancient scriptures that I'm aware of
that we actually had the accurate count
of the invisible ible Church in the land
of Israel or of the invisible followers
of the lord we don't know those uh
Elijah does not know even one of them he
thought he was the last one the sole uh
believer remaining in the land as far as
he looked out to the uh to the visible
nation of Israel nobody was left as part
of those who truly trusted in the Lord
and the Lord says no no no I've kept for
myself
7,000 that kind of perspective carries
through into the New Testament as well
in the local church we are always aware
that there are those that are truly of
the church uh meaning the church
invisible and then there are those who
are not and yet both of them are in the
visible
Church many times throughout Church's
history we have gotten these terms and
these Concepts muddled together we try
to make the visible church either
through Sacrament or baptism or whatever
they what have you we try to muddle
these two things together as though if
somebody is part of a visible Church are
automatically a part of the invisible
church yet the truth cannot be farther
from the scriptural uh amund of faith
and trust in Christ being part of this
not Sacrament that saves us not baptism
that saves us not going to church not
being a member of the church not being
recognized by the bishop none of these
things are expressed in God's actual
word as what saves us it is it is Faith
and the grace of God that has saved us
and placed us into the Beloved and so
that distinction I think as we go
forward is most helpful to express as
especially as we talk about how
leadership and Authority works out
because God makes it very very clear in
the way he structures the authority of
the church because the visible church is
necessary he always gives it a certain
type of leadership and I want you to see
it and I argue that Christ being the
singular head of the invisible church is
as biblical a concept as it gets not
only do we have it expressed
specifically and directly in places like
Ephesians chapter 1 and Colossians
chapter 1 where the Apostle Paul
expresses to us that that Christ has all
things put under his feet and gave him
his head over all things to the church
which is his body the fullness of him
who fills all in all that's Ephesians
1:22 and
23 the church as the body of Christ
Christ means that just as Christ cannot
be seen in the world today so the church
cannot be seen in the world today but
the effects of it can just as the spirit
of God is Not perceivable uh in form or
or in exactly what he's doing the
effects of him can be seen they can be
perceived right and it can be perceived
specifically through his body the
invisible church now here's the other
thing we can't even see the invisible
Church
fully right you cannot make perfect
calls on whether or not somebody is in
or out of the
Beloved so we have to deal with visible
church we'll talk about how that's done
Colossians 1:18 backs up the same
concept where the Apostle says and he
meaning Christ is the head of the body
the church he is the beginning the
firstborn from the dead that in
everything he might be
preeminent throughout history when
such convolutions happen where we mix up
the concept of visible and invisible
church we also mix up the concept of
Christ's leadership and the leadership
of the visible church as though if
somebody who is in charge of a visible
Church uh makes a decision that somehow
comes from
Christ for my Protestant brothers and
sisters uh we typically uh will look at
the the obvious nature of this with
regards to the papacy but I have met
many um Protestants who look at their
Pastor as though when he is giving a
sermon that you are hearing straight
from God no you are not you are hearing
from him when he reads the scriptures
you are hearing from God when you're
hearing from him you're hearing from him
that distinction must be made elsewise
we have humans that are standing and
speaking in the place of God and unless
they are sent prophets clearly um we
have massive issues with regards to
their authority to carry out such a
thing uh we'll talk more about that as
we move forward because here's the
reality in The Invisible Church there is
only one head it is
exclusive the leadership comes from him
the guidance the preservation the
Salvation the grace the intercession
everything comes through the exclusive
leadership of Christ this is what it
means for him to be the head of the
church the exclusive leadership of
Christ in The Invisible Church chur has
been the way of it since the very
beginning even when there was Kings in
Israel even when there was Moses
wandering in the desert even in the New
Testament we always have the exclusive
leadership of God there was an instance
if you recall where Moses actually
forgot
this if you remember when he struck the
rock I think a lot of people think that
Moses wasn't allowed in the promised
land simply because he disobeyed God but
it's not that simple it's not that
simple that's not exactly what it says
in numbers chap 20 what it actually says
uh let me let me read the story to you
right Jes uh God had said to him to uh
go up and speak to the Rock and have it
produce water for them well Moses and
Aaron it says this is in numbers 20:
10-13 Moses and Aaron gathered the
assembly together before the Rock and he
said to them here now you Rebel
shall we bring water for you out of this
rock and Moses lifted up his hand and
struck the rock with his staff twice and
water came out abundantly and the
congregation drank and their livestock
and what's the problem before even the
Lord answers to him was the problem one
yes God told him to speak to the Rock
but it's bigger than
that he has turned the tables around
standing next to God as God had made
clear to him he was going to be standing
right next to the Lord and he takes that
finger of accusation and points it out
at the
people let me paraphrase basically why
do God and I always have to fix
you look at the way he refers to the
entire assembly here now you rebels
shall we bring water for you out of this
rock why do Moses Aaron and God always
have to fix you guys why are we having
to fix you guys look at the response of
the Lord if you want to see it there
right it's verse 12 the Lord said to
Moses and Aaron because you did not
believe in me to uphold me as holy in
the eyes of the people of Israel
therefore you shall not bring this
assembly into the land that I have given
them
unquote because you did not uphold me as
holy this is I believe one of the chief
failures of leaders in the church
when they see that their leadership is
in charge when they see that their plan
their Ministry their influence is to be
their focus they are not upholding the
Holiness of God and in the visible
church as well as in The Invisible
Church the Holiness of Christ ought to
be our full
focus and when I say Holiness I mean his
uniqueness his exclusivity his
leadership his intercession
when I serve communion for instance at
my church I do not go up and hand it out
to people I am not an intercessor
between them and Christ they come to
Christ Christ is all of our intercessor
to the father I don't mean that I don't
have some role to play we do have roles
to play but when it comes to Salvation
when it comes to Authority when it comes
to the invisible Church it must be very
plainly EXP expressed Christ has
exclusive leadership just because I am a
pastor does not give me any right to
overrun this just because I have some
kind of leadership in the visible church
does not mean somehow that is conducive
to leadership over all the invisible
church or that people answer to God
through me or that when I die people
that were influenced by me will come to
heaven and see me in Jesus standing
there these concepts are evil
there is an exclusive leadership of
Christ in The Invisible church and that
should not change anything about how we
see in church history you say then how
do we study Bishops and how do we study
church leaders and reformers and um
revivalists how do we how do we
understand all these things well they
all make up in the visible church and
this is where we start seeing a
completely different
understanding between the invisible and
the visible Church in The Invisible
Church there is neither Jew nor Greek
male or female slave or free all or one
in
Christ but in the visible church God has
seen fit to establish leadership there
he has seen fit to structure his church
in a certain way carry out things like
church discipline and the the um the
ministry of the word the administration
of the Lord's supper or communion or
Eucharist whatever you call it and
baptism why is it we carry out all these
things why is it we do all these things
it is because Christ's exclusive
leadership has shown us these things he
tells us to observe the L Lord's Supper
whenever we and however often we carry
it out and to do it in remembrance of
him he tells us to go into the world and
baptize in the name of the father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit and thus our
exclusive leader has told us all all
what we should be
about you say okay so that's that's fine
but then how do we carry out all of
these other things we see these leaders
that pop up in the early church and yes
this is what I'm going to show in the
earliest churches well as working its
way forward until it added on to its own
Concepts how it always was in the times
of the
scriptures was that the only place where
there was a singular person that all
answered to was
Christ we are not built on the
foundations of one Prophet or one
Apostle we are built on the foundations
of the prophets and the apostles Christ
himself being the Cornerstone the only
singular in all of that is Christ there
is always a multifocality of leadership
in the church
always there is no time where the
visible Church ought to be without
multiple leaders holding each other
accountable so that there is
accountability so that there is uh an
ability to hold one another to the
importance of what we have so that none
of us becomes conceited and thinks of
himself as the Soul Leader of a visible
Church it is only human for people
to make everything go to a singular
person it is only human for us to think
that way to try to put all of our hopes
into a singular person it is why Cults
are almost always built around a
singular person it is why false
religions arise up over a singular
person someone like Muhammad or someone
like Joseph
Smith it is why these things rise up
over a singular person but that's not
how God ever gave his scripture it is
not how he ever induced his leadership
he gave multiple prophets
he gave multiple Kings he gave multiple
Elders multiple deacons there was always
multiples even when it came to the
apostles it was us who went through this
concept especially in the west we
struggled with this but many churches in
the ancient uh near East struggled with
this idea that we will just simply find
our favorite Apostle the one who founded
our church in our town and then Focus
all of our attention on one Apostle the
problem with that is that's not how the
leadership in the visible church was set
up the leadership in the visible church
was set up as
multifocal this is consistent with how
God has given his prophetic message it
is consistent with how God has led his
people it is consistent with the design
of God for instance in the judges that
was his original desire but what did the
people want they wanted Kings we want to
be like the people of the world it's
God's like that's not going to work out
well for you he's going to abuse you
he's going to do these things and these
things you're going to focus on singular
person and then you're going to be at
the whim of whether this goes right or
wrong and they're like doesn't matter we
want a king we want a king we want a
king and so the time of the judges comes
to a
close and so the plurality of
leadership the the Elders of the
people the judges of The People comes to
a close Samuel being the last one and
then
the Kings arise and what happens from
this is just a struggle
constantly right one generation is good
the next generation is terrible that
kind of up and down all over the place
we go to war if we want to be just like
the kingdoms of this world right well
there's many churches that have become
kingdoms like this world because they
want leadership into a singular
person but that should never be anywhere
other than Christ Christ should be the
only bottleneck of authority in the
church in the visible church as well in
the visible Church leadership is
shared let's move just to the New
Testament how many apostles did Jesus
have
one two he had
12 and then 13 one untimely born
Paul how many Elders were in each
church we don't know the exact number
but we know it was plural
always always
an apostle would go out and one of his
responsibilities was to found a church
and to appoint
Elders you can see that Titus
one you can see that instruction
considering these things teach these
things to Faithful Men
plural how many deacons well the first
day that deacons were made that office
was made there was seven there's always
multiple even in the service office of
deaconship there's always multiple so
that we do not have it all dependent on
a single human that is not Christ the
visible church and I want to say this
unequivocally so that there's no lack of
clarity in what I am saying in the
visible Church it is never to be a
singular Pastor or Apostle or
Bishop the only bottleneck of leadership
in the visible Church ought to be
consistent with the invisible church and
that is
Christ and so it makes sense to us when
we see the Apostle Paul writing to the
Corinthians and saying I'm glad that I
actually didn't baptize hardly any of
you right because you are all dividing
up into factions I'm of Paul I'm of
apollis I'm of cus things like is Christ
divided Christ is not divided we are all
servants who is Paul who is Apollos who
is
cus we do some work one of us plants
another one's Waters somebody else sees
the growth
there's multifocality in the leadership
of the church even when it comes to
decision-
making you see something like the
Jerusalem Council this is not James the
uh Bishop of Jerusalem just coming in
and ruling like a king no they have
discussions and in fact there's the
consent of all the Christians there if
you go and read that passage in Acts
chapter
15 it seemed good to all of
us this is not some struggle for
Authority I'm in charge everyone listen
to me that is not servant
leadership that is not biblically
consistent with any form of leadership
that is consistent with what got Moses
thrown out listen to me and
God
no I will listen to God and those who
are consistent with everything God has
told us throughout these many many many
centuries the leadership in the visible
Church ought to always always be
multifocal it should never bottleneck
down to a singular Apostle or a singular
bishop or a singular
pastor this was one of the issues that
in the earliest heresies of the church
marianismo night on um
marianismo cipe he uh his Focus was only
the Apostle Paul he was his favorite
writer I will asue anybody else the
entire old Old Testament I will remove
from the Apostle Paul anything he said
about the Old Testament in a positive
way I will pay attention to his travel
companion Luke and so he liked the
Gospel of Luke but you know cut down and
you know with all the jewishness removed
and the book of
Acts and so he had his own tiny Cannon
and followers and he built his whole
worldview out of it because he just
wanted the bottleneck to come down to a
singular Apostle and this should show us
the importance of this it doesn't even
matter that the Apostles scriptures are
there if that is all you are ever
reading or studying in the scriptures
that can lead you to be very one-sided
and
extreme just because that is not how
Christ sent the apostles to the church
he did not just send us Paul this is and
this is a universal criticism in the
early church against someone like
marcian God did not just send us Paul he
sent us his Apostles Matthew John John
Peter James he sent us all of these
people he sent us the prophets not just
one Prophet not just Isaiah but Jeremiah
too not just Jeremiah but Hosea and Joel
and Amos and Obadiah and Jonah and Micah
all the way through we see a multifocal
leadership anywhere there is a visible
church I admit there's different types
and shadows in the Old Testament but
especially for the New Testament Church
there is never a time where there's a
singular leader and that's the end of
it there's a reason for all of
this there's a theological rationale
behind all of this why is it in Acts
14:23 why did the apostles plural go out
and establish and appoint Elders plural
for them in every singular visible
Church what were they committed to you
see Acts 14:23 when they had appointed
Elders for them in every church with
praying and fasting they committed to
the Lord in whom they had
believed it was always multiple
leaders that was what it was supposed to
be many times in history different
churches different visible churches have
devoted themselves to a singular Apostle
or to a singular Pastor or to a singular
Focus these things are not the way
they're supposed to be
there's supposed to be a multifocality
because no bottleneck should ever depend
on a singular human that is not Jesus
Christ multifocal
leadership in the theological
rational is quite
practical it prevents
authoritarianism it promotes
accountability amongst the leaders of
the
church and most importantly it is
consistent with how God has built his
invisible
church this is this is something that I
think so many people miss the invisible
church is given
gifts spiritual gifts this is the same
way that the Holy Spirit operates he has
given spiritual gifts but he has never
given one person all the spiritual gifts
doesn't work like that one has this gift
one has that gift one is a hand one is a
foot one is an eye it doesn't mean
they're better doesn't mean they're
worse it just me means that they have a
different role inside the invisible
Church same it is for the visible
Church let's just limit it just to a
discussion of leadership for a second
and even just pull it out of the entire
visible Church to just the leadership of
the visible Church amongst the elders
and the deacons let's add Bishops into
the discussion for just right now
there's never to be that it's just
bottlenecked to
them there should be collegiality
amongst them all and it was so for
hundreds of
years such positions like Bishop
earliest on were not about Authority
primarily they were about maintaining
collegiality between gathered
assemblies in largest uh City centers
this is why they would have bread from
one church spread throughout all of the
churches in that City so that they could
maintain some semblance uh of of a
similar Eucharist amongst
them same for the
wine there's a
collective of diverse
Gifts of purposes of callings of
intentions of leadership styles the
differences amongst the leaders of the
church is what gives the church its
strength because if it all depends on a
singular person one either they will die
before their time or you will find them
morally
failure or you will find them successful
and then even worse everything works out
great and you place your hope in
them it doesn't work out well because
here's the thing they're not
Christ they're not even another
Christ they are just humans and I say
this as an elder in my
church these these people are not
superhuman we are not on top of the
world we are not on top of everything we
have been ordained people have analyzed
our life are they consistent with the
claims the professions of our faith and
as we move on do we hold consistently
with the scriptures because what God has
spoken is going to be consistent with
what God is doing in our life and we can
measure that we can perceive it as best
as we can are they a part of the
invisible church more than that are they
gifted to the purpose of edifying the
church for the work of the
ministry the theological rationale
behind this is all of that should never
depend on a singular leader of the
visible
church because as you remember there is
an exclusive leadership of Christ and
then he devoted it to a multifocality
of
Apostles and the apostles went about and
appointed
elders and elders and apostles together
appointed deacons it's always
plural unless you become
lopsided
always even with the rise of
Metropolitan Bishops we'll talk about
that another
time but you'll see that there is a
theological rationale behind this that
is just simply
practical none of us is the answer for
everyone else I say that as a pastor who
preaches every Sunday morning I am not
the answer to the church's woes I am not
the answer to their loneliness or to
their need or anything else God can rise
up another leader in my stad and he
already has there's other people in
leadership besides
me I do not have any unique authority
over an another Elder I do not have
anything like that why because I believe
there needs to be consistency with how
we practice the visible church with how
Christ instituted his invisible
Church consistency then
becomes one of the guiding principles
with all of this now here's something
I've never heard somebody make
connection to but I have and I want to
share it with you it's something that
helps me think about it quite a lot
at some point we are going to study in
this class the concept of the textual
manuscript tradition of the
scriptures how exactly the word of God
was preserved throughout history is one
of the most fascinating topics you'll
ever come across and here's the thing
that hardly anyone ever talks
about God did not
just drop down from Heaven a Bible with
a table of
contents with a
perfect uh photocopy of what Paul
wrote and then drop it into Lifeway
Christian Stores and say here buy it for
1999 that is not how any of this
worked in many
times manuscript tradition includes all
sorts of human
errors I believe
that God preserved his word
intentionally this way let me explain
what I
mean the presence of things like textual
variance in the manuscript tradition we
will talk about this we will spend
multiple nights on this uh a little bit
later
on the way that God has preserved his
scriptures is by using fallible copiers
to preserve an infallible
word you know how he did
it by never having it ever in one place
so that anyone could make wholesale
changes the manuscript tradition shows
from the very earliest and first
generation of the church the scriptural
documents went out into all the world
and were copied everywhere
what does that mean and especially for
the New Testament what does that mean
for us what it means for us is that God
consistently uses multifocality to
preserve his
teaching we do not just have a
collection of all the New Testament
writings buried in a cave somewhere in
the first century and we go okay great
we'll just use our scripture from that
we'll just translate that that is not
how it was preserved it was preserved
throughout the world nobody ever had
access to all of the copies of one thing
of one book and was able to make changes
to all of them okay that is very
important for textual Clarity it is very
important for our ability to reconstruct
the New Testament now I say reconstruct
it's not like it's just in pieces
everywhere but there's consistency
across
and there is an infallible text within
the preserved fallible copies and we are
able to see
it just for Simplicity eight people are
saying uh in different parts of the
world copying the Gospel of John for
instance or 25 people or whatever the
case may be one or two or three of them
make a mistake in John 3:16 for God so
loved the world he gave his only
begotten son that whoever
has eternal
life you say well they they skipped some
words well how do you know they skipped
some words well the other
2223 included
it now it's a very simplistic overview
of of textual variance but in the middle
of all of this everyone always focuses
on the variance and the missing or the
added or the whatever without attending
to the reality we actually can
reconstruct the original very easily
with things like this there's a few
things that have questions but here's
the thing we are able to establish the
text of the New Testament with an
unparalleled
reliability you say why are you talking
all about this why are you talking about
that because the way that God preserved
the
scriptures is the exact same way that he
preserves leadership in his
church it is not dependent on a singular
manuscript
it is not dependent on a singular human
leader the fallibility of textual
manuscripts and the
multifocality of their preservation is
how God has preserved his scriptures and
it should not surprise us in the least
that God has done the same with his
church leadership on a broad basis
throughout his prophets his Apostles his
Elders his deacons so that in the whole
proper leadership is carried
out you say well even groups of leaders
can go astray I know that's because
scripture also has a role to play
scripture being that which continually
realigns even multifocal leadership back
to the truth of the Gospel so that they
do not in a group become self-conceited
and Lead one another
astray when you see the history of God's
revelation to see that there's many many
different strains of prophets all
focused in on the one person Christ and
then out of him comes many different
strains of Apostles Elders deacons and
all sorts of Expressions here the only
place it all bottlenecks is right there
at
Christ it is the way of it in the
invisible church and I argue and I will
always argue it is the way of it in the
visible church
elsewise we become as lopsided as
marcian
we make Peter the one Apostle through
whom we're going to run everything when
he was never made that
way you say well he was given we're
going to talk about Peter a whole night
he was given the Keys of the Kingdom
right the power to bind and loose all
the apostles were given that just a
couple of chapters
later so he was the first one to preach
in Jerusalem I
understand I understand everyone had
roles to play I know this we're going to
walk all through this kind of stuff
but he was not
alone Christ did not send one Apostle he
sent
12 and the apostles did not set up
singular pastors everywhere they sent up
elders and the elders did not choose
singular deacons they they chose
multiple deacons there should always be
multiples in order to maintain Christ is
the exclusive head of the church and
that is what I mean when I say Christ is
the head of church
history if Christ is not seen constantly
as the head of Church's History either
in the invisible or in the visible
church then everything we do is going to
be lopsided it may be lopsided even if
we hold on to that you may be in a
church that sees its history as as
focused in Christ and then we also have
just our singular
leader uh all I hope to show you is that
that is not consistent with how Christ
chose his Apostles nor is it consistent
with how the church was originally set
up you say well what about Metropolitan
Bishops what about popes what about
Patriarchs we will talk all about these
things but I want to show you that in
the scriptures Christ did not send one
Apostle he did not give the power to
bind and loose to one Apostle he did not
just choose one disciple and they did
not just set up One Elder in each church
it was always multiple always always
always and many churches throughout
history have rediscovered and learned
and known this and several churches have
chosen to focus on one thing one Apostle
one Bishop one thing and place all the
leadership into that one person that is
not able to in any way hold up the
weight of what belongs to Christ Alone
and so when I say Christ is the head of
church history it is because he is the
head of the
church and that is taught in scripture
over and over again the church is his
body the history of the church is the
history of his body he is still the
singular and exclusive head and nobody
else is the head nobody else is the neck
everyone else has a role to play and it
should never pull away from Christ's
leadership nor should it be adding to it
nor are they next to it none of these
things remember Moses I'm standing next
to God me and Aaron always got to fix
you guys no you are still standing out
in the crowd and God still has to fix
you there is no this is why certain
churches have to argue for infallibility
to be present at times in their Church's
leaders you can't do that Christ Alone
is infallible we are all
fallible that is why we need a
multiplicity of leadership
that is why we need a multiplicity of
leadership it's the same when it comes
to preserving the scriptures there is
nobody that ever had control of all the
documents and all the manuscripts in the
church's history of its textual
transmission never and that is the
mechanism through which God uses
fallible people like
us to lead his infallible church will we
do it perfectly no
did we preserve his scriptures perfectly
no but the gospel that we Proclaim and
the scriptures that been preserved these
are God's work and does God still do
work through US yes he said what if what
if my church just has a singular Pastor
or you find yourself a singular Pastor
work towards a more biblical concept
that comes down to us in this do not
take the power that may be found in
yours if you find yourself as the only
pastor in a church you need
accountability
immediately Christ has not made you to
be a lone wolf no Christian is built for
that that is why Fellowship exists that
is why the attendance to the gathered
assembly exists that is why the
multifocality of leadership exists none
of you are capable of
maintaining that kind of leadership and
that kind of Christian Life all on your
own you are not that strong you're not
that strong but Christ is
and him as head over all of these things
not only in the
church but in all things because he is
the preeminent one that should show
you the reality that when you study
church history especially when you set
down to begin studying church history it
will always color the way you talk about
things how you hold to Christ's role I
personally hold to Christ's role as very
minutely involved in his
churches it is not just up to us to
carry out these things he is minutely
involved with his church as he promised
us in the Great Commission he will never
leave us or forsake us even to the End
of the Age no matter where we
go the spirit of God continually
indwells his people his invisible church
that is not exactly known to us but we
make the best calls that we can and we
gather together in the visible church
and carry out the leadership responsib
abilities that he has devoted to his
people it is always amongst a
group that we may always uh remember
that the exclusive leadership belongs to
Christ alone the head of all church
history I hope that is encouraging for
you um as as we end this episode let me
remind you that uh as we work through
this we are going to begin our history
walkthrough our first three episodes
were on the concepts of church history
what is church history why study church
history and Christ is the head of the
church's
history after this now we delve into the
history and let me tell you what we're
going to be dealing with next week I am
looking forward to it very very much and
that is James the Lord's brother and the
Jerusalem Church uh we're going to be in
the book of Acts for quite a while here
um several months actually before we
even get out of this because I want to
ensure that we have a good historical
grounding before we move out of the time
of the book of Acts uh and then move
along further and further and further so
uh I'm very grateful for you attending
uh this along the way and uh Lord's
blessings to you all I do pray that uh
this is a blessing to each and every one
of you as we continue on through
Church's history may God bless you all
[Music]
oh
[Applause]
[Music]